JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: a
deadly night in Dallas.
Authorities are piecing together
a sniper attack that left five
police officers dead and seven
wounded, ending a week filled
with violence and sorrow.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Here in
Dallas, emotions are still
running high after the worst
attack
on police since 9/11. We
will have the latest.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then, I sit down
with Hillary Clinton to talk the
state of race and justice
in the U.S.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: The cuts
across so many of the divides in
our country, and it should send
a clarion call to every single
one of us. We do not
want to live like this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
analyze this full week of
news.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: This has been a
day of great tragedy in a city
that has known great tragedy
before.
Last night's sniper ambush in
Dallas left five police officers
dead, the worst loss
for American law enforcement
since 9/11. It happened just
blocks from where President
Kennedy was
assassinated in 1963.
Hari Sreenivasan begins
our coverage from Dallas.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A barrage of
gunfire, the wail of police
sirens, signals that downtown
Dallas had morphed into a combat
zone. The shooting sent hundreds
of people running for
their lives. They had been
peacefully marching against
fatal police shootings in
Minnesota
and Louisiana.
JASON MCDANIEL, Dallas: They
just started going off, I mean,
just, pow, pow, pow, pow,
pow. And then everybody started
running everywhere. As we were
leaving, we heard the automatic
fire, the dah, dah, dah, dah,
the back-to-back fire. And it
was -- it just was wild.
MAN: Somebody's really
armed to the teeth.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The horror was
quickly up on social media for
the world to see. A gunman
was spotted shooting a rifle at
police from behind a pillar.
Later, officers cornered a
suspect in a nearby parking
garage. After four hours of
failed
negotiations, police detonated a
bomb on a robotic vehicle,
killing the man.
Dallas Police Chief David Brown:
DAVID BROWN, Dallas Police
Chief: He said he was upset
about the recent police
shootings.
The suspect said he was upset at
white people. The suspect stated
he wanted to kill white
people, especially
white officers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Investigators
identified him as Micah Johnson
of Mesquite, Texas. He
had served six years in the Army
Reserve, with one tour in
Afghanistan. He told police
he had acted alone, and
organizers of the Dallas protest
said they had never heard of
him.
The Black Lives Matter movement
issued a statement on its main
Twitter page, saying it -- quote
-- "advocates dignity, justice
and freedom, not murder."
Authorities initially said three
suspects were in custody. They
gave no other details
as the day went on. Meanwhile,
much of downtown Dallas was
cordoned off as a crime scene,
although officials did allow a
prayer vigil. And police Chief
Brown appealed for support
and unity.
DAVID BROWN: All I know is that
this must stop, this
divisiveness between our police
and our citizens. We don't feel
much support most days. Let's
not make today most days.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Until last
night, the Dallas Police
Department had the fewest number
of
officer-related shootings of any
American city this year. Still,
this city of 1.3 million
people is rattled, and
wondering what comes next.
Some of those concerned
residents were at Elaine's
Kitchen in South Dallas.
WALTER REED, Dallas: You never
know what kind of police is
going to pull behind you. And
same way, you know, I don't know
what's on the minds of anybody
that wants to cause a
harm to a police officer,
because if they can kill one
person, they can kill any
person.
CHERRUNDA WHITE, Dallas: For
some people, they see things,
what's going on in the world,
and think, I guess, they can
take it into their own hands or
retaliate, but, of course,
violence isn't the answer.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dallas Mayor
Mike Rawlings called for calm
today, and he vowed greater
protection for police
in the future.
The Dallas killings echoed
around the world as well.
President Obama got the news in
Poland
at a NATO summit.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: Let's be clear.
There is no possible
justification
for these kinds of attacks or
any violence against law
enforcement. The FBI is already
in touch with the Dallas police,
and anyone involved in these
senseless murders will be
held fully accountable.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Washington,
Democrat John Lewis of Georgia
and the Congressional
Black Caucus made an
appeal for reconciliation.
REP. JOHN LEWIS (D), Georgia: I
really believe that we must come
to that point in our country
where we respect the dignity and
the worth of every human being.
We can do it. But leaders
must lead.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And Attorney
General Loretta Lynch also
sought to reassure the country,
after the tumult of recent days.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: Do not let this week
precipitate a new normal in
this country. I ask you to turn
to each other, not against each
other, as we move forward.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Elsewhere,
protesters did stand united last
night, marching peacefully
in New York City, Chicago, and
Philadelphia to demand justice
for black victims killed
by police.
There was even one in
Washington, D.C., last night
before I headed home, Judy, that
we
stopped by, and streamed
on Facebook live.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Hari, I know
you have been learning more this
evening about this sniper,
this gunman. What have
you been able to learn?
HARI SREENIVASAN: We knew that
the 25-year-old had been in the
Army Reserve. We knew now
-- we know now during the day
that he was -- also had a tour
in Afghanistan.
But what we're also learning is
that, according to police, that
he had been plotting this
for quite some time. At his
home, they found a detailed
combat journal. They found a lot
bomb-making material. They found
ammunition and rifles. This is
according to the police
chief today.
Again, they don't think that
there are any known ties to
international organizations
or even black nationalist
organizations, but this is a
picture that is going to be
filled
in more and more over the
next couple of days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Hari, I know
you have only been there today,
but what is your sense of
how the community is dealing
with this and what are you
learning about the relations
there between the people
and the police force?
HARI SREENIVASAN: You know, I
used to live here for a few
years back when I worked for
another network, but one of the
things that was interesting is
that this is a police department
that's actually made significant
strides in trying to enforce
community policing, trying
to get in touch with
their communities.
Over the last several years,
they have decreased the number
of officer-related incidents of
violence. They have decreased
the number of arrests. They have
decreased the number of
complaints of use of force. This
is, by all measures throughout
the country, this is a
force that's trying
to do things right.
There is actually a greater deal
of trust between the Dallas
Police Department and the
citizens here than there
was 10 years ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which is
what makes it so ironic.
Hari Sreenivasan, reporting for
us from Dallas, we thank you.
Police reported attacks in three
more states today after the
Dallas ambush. They said a
suspect in Valdosta, Georgia,
ambushed an officer who answered
a 911 call. Both were
wounded. A suburban Saint Louis
man critically wounded a
policeman during a traffic stop.
And in Bristol, Tennessee,
officers wounded a suspect after
he fired at them.
The events in Dallas drew quick
reactions from the presidential
candidates.
Republican Donald Trump said, in
a statement: "It is a
coordinated, premeditated
assault
on the men and women who keep us
safe. We must restore law and
order."
And Democrat Hillary Clinton
said in a tweet: "I mourn for
the officers shot while doing
their sacred duty to protect
peaceful protesters."
We will have an interview with
Secretary Clinton right after
the news summary.
A sitting member of the U.S.
House has been indicted on fraud
charges. Florida Democrat
Corrine Brown and her chief of
staff were charged today. The
indictment says they used
funds from a fraudulent charity
to line their own pockets. The
money was supposed to fund
scholarships for poor students.
Economic news, meanwhile, was
positive. Hiring in the U.S.
surged in June, after two months
of subpar results. The Labor
Department reports employers
added a net 287,000 jobs, the
most
since last October. The
unemployment rate rose
two-tenths to 4.9 percent, as
more people
started looking for work.
The jobs news helped Wall Street
finish recovering from the
Brexit sell-off. The Dow Jones
industrial
average gained 250 points to
close at 18146. The Nasdaq rose
nearly 80 points, and the
S&P 500 added 32.
In Iraq, Prime Minister Haider
al-Abadi fired Baghdad's
security chief and accepted the
interior minister's resignation,
after a wave of Islamic State
attacks. At least 186 people
died Sunday in a Baghdad car
bombing, and an attack last
night in Balad killed 37 more
at a Shiite shrine. A suicide
bomber blew himself up at the
shrine's entrance, allowing
other attackers to push inside.
Iraq's top Shiite cleric
blamed poor security.
AHMED AL-SAFI, Spokesman for
Grand Ayatollah Sistani (through
translator): At the beginning
of this week, at the end of the
holy month of Ramadan, ISIS
targeted innocent people
and killed hundreds of them.
Last night, the terrorists
targeted the holy shrine.
So, if the authorities won't
live up to their
responsibilities and put an end
to such security
violations, the terrorists will
continue committing crimes
against the Iraqi people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The attacks come
as ISIS has been losing
territory elsewhere in Iraq.
The number of refugees seeking
asylum in Germany dropped
sharply in the first half of the
year.
Berlin says 222,000 people have
registered so far. The number
for all of last year topped
one million.
Since then, the Balkan nations
have largely shut off overland
migration, and Turkey has
curbed crossing of the Aegean
Sea in a deal with the European
Union.
And back in this country, the
House of Representatives passed
last-minute legislation to stem
the
surge in drug abuse deaths, and
they sent it to the Senate.
Nearly 50,000 people died
of drug overdoses in the U.S. in
2014. That's the last year
measured. And it's double the
figure from 2000. More than half
are caused by heroin and
opioids.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Hillary Clinton on the Dallas
police shooting and race
relations
in the U.S.; NATO's largest
military buildup in Europe since
the end of the Cold War; and
much more.
We return to the events in
Dallas and the violence
involving police across the
country
this week.
And we get the perspective of
the presumptive Democratic
presidential nominee, Hillary
Clinton.
We also invited Donald Trump. He
declined, but we hope to talk
with him soon.
I spoke with the Secretary
Clinton a short time ago.
Welcome, Secretary Clinton.
As I talk to you, we're hearing
about still more attacks on the
police in this country.
Why do you think it is, more
than 50 years after the height
of the civil rights movement,
that we're seeing events in this
country like what we have
witnessed this week?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: Judy, I
wish I could answer that
question.
I have thought so much about it.
And I'm not sure of all the
reasons why we are witnessing
this kind of violence. And
we have got to look at it
broadly. What happened in
Dallas, what's happening to
other police
officers in our country
is absolutely outrageous.
We have got to do much more to
protect and respect the police.
And we have to do much
more to make sure that citizens
in our country, particularly
African-Americans, feel
respected
and protected by the police.
I think we have got to listen to
each other. We need a
conversation. White people need
to be listening to
African-Americans about what it
feels like to live with, you
know,
fear and anxiety, to be
profiled, to worry about what
will happen to their children
when
they go out to play or out
on a date or go for a drive.
We have to listen to the fears
of our police officers, who get
up every day and do a dangerous
job, like the police in Dallas
who ran toward the shooting when
it broke out after a peaceful
protest.
I'm going to do everything I can
in this campaign to try to find
common ground, bring people
together. And I have got some
specific ideas about what we can
do for criminal justice
reform. We need national
guidelines about the use of
force, particularly lethal
force.
We need to work with the 18,000
police departments in our
country, some of whom are real
models
and others should be learning
from about how they de-escalate
tension, rather than turning
a routine traffic
stop into a killing.
And, of course, we need to
investigate the implicit bias
that, unfortunately, too many
of us still have. And when it's
an implicit bias in a police
officer, it can lead to an
escalating situation.
So, we have got work to do.
Certainly, our elected
officials, our leaders in our
communities,
but really all of us as
Americans have a stake in trying
to listen respectfully to each
other
and, you know, really try to
find ways we can contribute to
ending this violence that
is stalking our nation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, are you
saying you think you could make
more progress on this than
an African-American president
who has made improving race
relations a priority of his
administration?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well, I
think President Obama has done
an extraordinary job in trying
to explain and provide
information to anyone who's
willing to listen about the
inequities
and the difficulties that are
being confronted by so many of
our fellow Americans.
His policing commission that he
put together after Ferguson,
Missouri, has excellent
recommendations,
but not enough police
departments have followed them.
And I want to put money in the
budget
when I'm president to make it
possible for every police
department to implement these
important reforms.
And I think, too, there has got
to be a national conversation.
And it can't be just elected
officials. We need people in
communities talking to each
other. You know, during the
primary
campaign in Kentucky, I had a
wonderful experience one Sunday
morning going to an
African-American
church.
And it just so happened, the day
I was there, they were being
visited by a white church.
So, you had a mixed choir. You
had both preachers addressing
the congregation. You had people
shaking hands and exchanging
views and talking about their
lives.
You know, that may sound easy,
but it's hard in lots of places
in our country. And it needs
to happen not just on Sunday.
It needs to happen every day.
And, as a white person, I want
to make clear that whites have
to listen. We have to recognize,
you know, many of the fears and
anxieties that our
African-American, our Latino and
others in our society feel. We
saw the terrible shooting at the
Pulse nightclub in Orlando,
our LGBT friends.
I mean, this cuts across so many
of the divides in our country.
And it should send a clarion
call to every single one of us.
We do not want to live like
this. We don't want people,
any American, living in fear. We
don't want our police living in
fear.
And if we want to end that,
we're going to have to work
together.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Madam Secretary,
we also want to ask you about
the FBI report that came
out this week.
We heard the director, James
Comey, say they were not going
to recommend criminal charges
against you, but he said that
you and your colleagues at the
State Department were, in
his words, extremely careless in
the handling of very sensitive,
highly classified information.
Do you believe you benefited
from a double standard, that
ordinary government employees
experience one sort of treatment
and a different one for you?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON:
No, not at all.
In fact, I think Director Comey
made exactly the opposite point
in his long testimony yesterday,
that those who somehow hoped
that action would be taken are
the ones who were hoping for
a double standard.
He made very clear there was no
basis for going forward. And he
also clarified what
he said in his statement.
You know, with respect to the
handling of classified material,
I take it very seriously,
and the 300 or so people with
whom I e-mailed on the course of
my time in the State Department
do as well. These are
experienced diplomats. They have
expertise in handling classified
material. They
were not careless.
And the material that they sent
to me, they didn't believe was
classified. The very, very
few examples that Director Comey
pointed to have also been
clarified, as he accounted
yesterday. The State Department
has said two of the three that
he had pointed to were human
error. They were not
to be classified.
So, I'm very proud of the work
that we did over four years. And
I'm very proud of our
diplomats and our other
professionals, who have to act
in real time. They are
responding
to heads of state, to press
inquiries. And they are doing
the best they can. I do not
believe they were careless. I do
not believe that they sent
material that they thought
was classified, and certainly no
finding of anything intentional
was made after this
investigation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last question,
then. Do you think Director
Comey erred in calling it -- in
saying it was
extremely careless?
And I ask that because one of
the arguments you make in your
comparison with Donald Trump
is that you, as a president,
would be more competent than he
would be in the White House.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well, I
think there is a lot of evidence
to that, based on eight
years as a senator handling a
lot of classified material,
based as four years as a
secretary
of state, handling classified
material, which, in my view,
didn't include what was sent on
an unclassified system, and
certainly was the judgment of
the hundreds of people with
experience and expertise
who dealt with me.
But, look, I am grateful for the
professionalism of the FBI and
the Department of Justice.
And I repeat that I made a
mistake using personal e-mail,
and I regret that very much.
But I think, if one looks at the
totality of my public service
and the very difficult
decisions that I grappled with,
from bin Laden to the Iran
sanctions and so much more,
people
can count on me to do the
job that is required.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary Hillary
Clinton, we thank you for
talking to us on this day.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON:
Thank you very much, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now back
to this week's violence.
From Minnesota to Texas, it has
brought long-simmering tensions
to the spotlight, sparking a
national
dialogue on race and policing.
Jeffrey Brown picks
up that conversation.
JEFFREY BROWN: And for that, I'm
joined by three people closely
involved with this.
Malik Aziz is the deputy police
chief for Dallas. Edward Flynn
is police chief for Milwaukee.
His force has faced scrutiny and
protests tied to past police
shootings there. And Michael
Eric Dyson is a writer and
professor of sociology at
Georgetown University. He is the
author
of "The Black Presidency," and
wrote a piece today's The New
York Times called "Death in
Black and White."
Welcome to you all.
Malik Aziz, I would
like to start with you.
And as we start the
conversation, could I ask you
first, are you able to now to
confirm
that it was one shooter
last night in Dallas?
MALIK AZIZ, Deputy Police Chief,
Dallas Police Department: Well,
all I can really confirm
right now is that it's -- we
know that it's at least one
shooter.
And with our investigative unit,
who is one of the best in the
nation, they're turning
over every rock and looking in
every crevice to make sure that
the Dallas police, as you
heard our chief, David Brown and
the mayor say earlier, that they
believe it's a lone
shooter. We just
want to make sure.
So, we haven't concluded any
investigation. We're just on the
surface. So, right now,
we have that one lone shooter,
and we're going to make sure
that he is the only one before
we release any definitive
totality of statements.
JEFFREY BROWN: Tell us,
Commander Aziz, your own
feelings, the feelings of
members of the
force about what
happened last night.
MALIK AZIZ: Well, I can say,
extend my heartfelt condolences
and heartfelt sympathy to the
family, friends, loved ones, my
brothers and sisters in blue
across the nation and abroad,
that our hearts here in Dallas
today are very heavy, a very
somber attitude, one of
disbelief.
And it is one of those days. I
have been in law enforcement 27
years here in the city
or county of Dallas, and I have
never had a day like yesterday.
It's a day of days,
and the worst day of our career
and my career and many others,
and one of the worst in the
nation.
So our men and women are hurt
today, but I must say the
outpouring of the residential
and business community in
Dallas, our awesome citizenry,
and they have shown why they're
one of the best cities in the
world, that Dallas is one of the
best cities in the world.
They have shown us so much love
and support, and so much love
and support in the nation
and abroad.
JEFFREY BROWN: Chief Flynn in
Milwaukee, what impact has there
been in your force or perhaps
in other forces from what
happened last night?
EDWARD FLYNN, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, Police Chief: Well, I
think it's a recognition -- and
it's certainly a topic of
discussion among our officers --
of the great conundrum that
surrounds American policing,
which it is very important for
us, most specifically, to
protect
the rights of the people
most displeased with us.
We have done that many times
here in Milwaukee, and that
takes place in city after city
across
the country. Dallas is a fine
police department, but it's not
an anomaly among American big
cities. Going all the way back
to the mid-'90s, when the
Clinton administration passed
the
omnibus crime bill, policing has
embraced the notion of
community-based policing,
reaching
out to disadvantaged
neighborhoods and doing our best
to create alliances with those
neighborhoods
to work with them to
create safe environments.
And that's what we endeavor to
do. And there is no group of
people in America more committed
to protecting black lives than
America's police officers in our
urban centers. We're the one
group of people, in fact, that
regularly risk our lives to do
that.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, and,
Michael Eric Dyson, I will bring
you into this now.
What impact does what happened
last night have on this larger
ongoing discussion of
the shooting of many
African-Americans by the police?
MICHAEL ERIC DYSON, Professor,
Georgetown University: Well, it
throws into the bold
relief that all lives of course
are significant, important and,
ultimately, clearly, matter.
When Black Lives Matter says
their theme, what they're trying
to underscore is that
there is an historic legacy and
pattern of inequality that has
prevailed in this culture
that has stigmatized
and demonized others.
The reality is, when we look at
the situation in Dallas, the
lives of those police people
are significant and matter. They
should be taken seriously. We
grieve with them in that
city and nation for the loss of
life by a deranged person who
sought to execute his
vision of justice in the world.
And we want the same empathy of
the police departments of this
nation which do a fine
job in many instances to defend
the lives of those who have been
vulnerable. When police
people act with disregard for
life, and end up targeting one
population vs. another, when
the lethal and ferocious
consequences of policing in
situations like we have seen
this week
occur, we want the police, who
we defend, who I will defend and
say they have a righteous
duty and job to do, we also want
these police to say, this
doesn't represent the best of
who we are, this doesn't
represent what our ideals are.
So, when citizens who are
clearly not in the wrong and who
are trying to comply with the
wishes of a particular police
person who are then killed, we
have to have the police
supporting
citizens who suggest that that
is wrong, even as citizens
should stand behind great police
people, two of which -- two of
which whose representatives we
have on the show today,
to say, this is the
appropriate thing.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask, Malik
Aziz, react, respond to that,
please, because the Dallas
Police Department has been
considered a leader in community
involvement and bringing down
the numbers of killings. What is
your response to Michael Eric
Dyson?
MALIK AZIZ: Well, yes, we have
just what he said. Community
policing, community engagement,
Dallas police has -- every chief
has built on a strong foundation
and endeavored to make
it better.
There can be no progress actual
unless we actually work
together. The police and the
community must work together.
There is no us vs. them. It's
only us working together.
So, when we look at things, and
we must show compassion. Any
police officer, any police
chief who doesn't show
compassion or you don't think
he's bothered when we have to
take a
life, it is not easy. And we are
often in those things because,
by the very nature of
the job, it calls on us to
engage. And we want to engage
the right way. We want to be
accountable.
That's why we have police chief
and police leaders to make sure
that we are responsible
and accountable, but we also
must endeavor to actually have a
coalescing of community
and police and realize that
we're not on an island when it
comes to policing.
If we don't actually -- if a
community doesn't actually
demand for a right way to be
policed,
then you will leave it up to the
police to give you our version
of policing. And that
may not be what community
actually needs.
JEFFREY BROWN: Edward Flynn, let
me ask you. This is also a day
in which we have had a
lot of -- some talk on social
media and elsewhere that the
rhetoric against police is
perhaps
inciting violence as we
saw last night in Dallas.
Do you see a growing anti-police
atmosphere in the country?
EDWARD FLYNN: I think what we're
finding on the streets of our
cities is a level of license
being taken by the offending
community to challenge officers
on the streets of our most
disadvantaged neighborhoods,
where our efforts are the most
important and most requested.
I think what we need to do is
step back from this binary
discussion we're having right
now that, on the right hand, we
talk about police use of force,
when it's right or when
it's apparently wrong, and then
on the left hand, we talk about
the fact that the greatest
disparity of race in America
right now is as a crime victim,
all right?
Our central cities, our
communities of disadvantage
characterized by
intergenerational poverty
have the highest rates of
violence for what we like to
call the industrialized society.
We're the most heavily armed,
most violent society in the
industrialized West.
And it is our African-American
communities of disadvantage that
suffer the most from
it. Their partners in dealing
with it are the police, who are
often placed in difficult
or ambiguous circumstances and
sometimes do the wrong thing,
but overwhelmingly are the
community partners.
If we're going to have that
community discussion, we have to
talk about it all at the same
time,
because the same neighborhoods
with the highest rates of
violence have the highest rates
of
poverty, unemployment,
substandard housing and lack of
education.
We haven't had that
conversation in 40 years.
JEFFREY BROWN: So,
Michael Eric Dyson...
EDWARD FLYNN: We have been
delegating America's social
problems to the police.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, how do we get
there in our last minute here?
MICHAEL ERIC DYSON: No, it's
extremely important to take what
the chief said, to integrate
all of those facets together.
When we talk about the economic
inequality that prevails in the
cities, when police are
thrown into the cauldron,
seething as it is, when black
and brown people are subject to
sometimes excessive use of force
against them, when they are
policed by people who come from
outside of their communities,
community policing is a grand
and great ideal.
I think that the issues of
inequality must be put forth on
the table. And the respect
for human life, why is it that
there is a vicious repetition of
pattern in certain communities
and not others? We must see each
other as human beings. We must
acknowledge the difficulty
of the job that the police have
to do, but also to respect the
humanity of those people.
When we see this week the tragic
loss of life of those police,
but before that two black
victims who didn't deserve to
die, and we would expect the
police to say, this is wrong,
this is a scurrilous and, I
think, an insensitive offense to
any American.
And when we see police
empathizing with that, then
those who empathize with the
police can
bridge that gulf. And, together,
we can address the issues that
need to be addressed.
JEFFREY BROWN: Michael Eric
Dyson, Milwaukee Police Chief
Edward Flynn, and Malik Aziz
in Dallas, thank you,
three, very much.
MICHAEL ERIC DYSON:
Thank you so kindly.
MALIK AZIZ: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: Leaders
from NATO countries met in
Poland today to finalize plans
to beef
up the military alliance.
For the first time since the
Cold War, multinational troops
will continuously rotate through
four
countries in Eastern Europe.
Special correspondent Nick
Schifrin, with the help of the
Pulitzer Center on Crisis
Reporting, concludes our series
with a look at America's largest
military buildup there
in a quarter-century, and why
Russia sees it as a threat.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Here's the
scenario: An unnamed enemy has
invaded a NATO ally. The U.S.
response
is heavy and swift. For U.S.
troops who have been fighting in
Iraq and Afghanistan, this
is more firepower than
they have ever had.
MAN: That (EXPLETIVE DELETED)
was (EXPLETIVE DELETED) wild.
CAPT. JOEL MARBUT, U.S. Army: We
have been fighting an insurgency
for the last 14 years.
Now we're prepared to fight
someone who is closely matched
to our combat power.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Captain Joel
Marbut deployed twice to
Afghanistan. This exercise, held
last month, was the largest in
Eastern Europe since the Cold
War.
CAPT. JOEL MARBUT: Now they're
prepared for any enemy
counterattack to come back
across
the international border.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Marbut isn't
allowed to name that enemy. But
in the command tent, Lieutenant
Colonel Johnny Evans pulls fewer
punches when discussing his
Polish hosts.
LT. COL. JOHNNY EVANS, U.S.
Army: And they see examples of
Russian aggression. Us being
here, assuring them that the
U.S. has not abandoned them,
that the U.S. is still a strong
supporter of NATO can do nothing
but provide additional
assurance.
NICK SCHIFRIN: On the training
ground, there was even a
burned-out Soviet-style tank for
target practice. This is not
only assurance to allies. It's
also deterrence and a warning
to Russia.
After the Cold War, the U.S.
military dramatically downsized
in Europe, from 200,000 to
30,000
troops. Now the U.S. is planning
to quadruple spending. And it
will rotate 4,200-soldier
heavily armored brigades back to
back with their own equipment at
the highest level of
readiness.
LT. GEN. BEN HODGES, Commander,
U.S. Army Europe: That is a
powerful capability that
will be very effective at help
-- changing the calculus for
Russia or any potential
adversary
in Europe.
NICK SCHIFRIN: General Ben
Hodges commands all U.S. Army
forces in Europe. Those new
American troops are in addition
to 700-person NATO battalions
deploying to the Baltic states
and Poland.
We spoke to Hodges during
the Poland exercise.
LT. GEN. BEN HODGES: I think a
combination of a NATO battalion,
plus a U.S. armored brigade
combat team, that's a powerful
deterrent. If deterrence fails,
now you're talking about
a liberation campaign.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For the Poles,
that word liberation doesn't
feel farfetched.
ANNA MARIA ANDERS, Polish
Senator: The Poles are very
nervous, obviously, because of
World
War II.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Few Polish
politicians have more World War
II credentials than Minister
and Senator Anna Maria Anders.
Her father was Wladyslaw Anders,
who fought the Soviets
as Poland's army commander.
Today, this community remembers
how, during the war, the Soviets
deported local residents
to Siberia.
ANNA MARIA ANDERS: These people
are worried that it will happen
again.
NICK SCHIFRIN: What convinced
them it could happen again?
ANNA MARIA ANDERS:
Crimea. Crimea.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In 2014, Russian
soldiers in Crimea sparked an
annexation from Ukraine.
It took less than a month.
ANNA MARIA ANDERS: I think that
we all have become a little
complacent. We haven't had
a war in so long.
NICK SCHIFRIN: U.S. soldiers are
teaching Poles military
hardware, starting in childhood.
LT. COL. DERIC HOLBROOK, U.S.
Army: That's where the trust
starts, from that youngest
generation building trust. They
understand that America is
aligned with Poland.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Lieutenant
Colonel Deric Holbrook leads the
2nd Cavalry's Field Artillery
Squadron.
Part of the Polish exercise is
visiting small towns like
Suwalki. Soldiers and fathers
encouraged
kids to become
comfortable with guns.
Nearby, young baton twirlers
entertained the crowd. It seemed
like this entire town of
60,000 showed up in support. The
next morning, Holbrook's men hit
the road.
They were on a 500-mile drive,
the longest military movement in
Eastern Europe since
World War II. They drove through
this 60-mile-wide gap between
NATO members Poland and
Lithuania.
This is the Suwalki Gap, where
NATO's notion of collective
self-defense is perhaps most
vulnerable. Thirty miles to my
west is Kaliningrad, a Russian
enclave. Thirty miles to my
east,
Belarus, a Russian ally. If
Russia wanted to move into this
gap, it could most likely
cut off the Baltic states from
the rest of Europe and the rest
of NATO.
That geography is a product of
NATO's expansion east. In 1949,
NATO's eastern border was Italy.
By 1999, it had added seven more
countries, by 2009, nine more
countries, including the
Baltics. Suddenly, NATO had
beachheads on Russia's borders.
DIMITRI SIMES, Center for the
National Interest: If we would
discover that there would be
Russian
troops in Mexico, I wonder how
many American politicians and
indeed American people would
that think this is an
acceptable situation.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Dimitri Simes
leads the Washington think tank
the center for the National
Interest.
For Russia, NATO isn't
defensive. Since 1999, NATO has
launched wars in Kosovo,
Afghanistan
and Libya. Each one
ended in regime change.
DIMITRI SIMES: That certainly
made an impression in Moscow
that NATO expansion was a direct
threat, not just to their
security, but also to their
domestic stability.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Russia again felt
threatened when the U.S. either
encouraged or supported
revolutions in previously
pro-Russian countries. The final
straw was Ukraine.
DIMITRI SIMES: If Ukraine is
hostile and joins NATO, that
would be viewed by Russia as an
existential threat.
NICK SCHIFRIN: This isn't only
the thinking of intellectuals or
the Moscow elite.
VITALIY ANATOLIEVICH, Cossack
Commander (through translator):
We are not going to Mexico.
Imagine
if Russia moved
its troops there.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Vitaliy
Anatolievich is a Cossack
commander in the breakaway
Ukrainian region
of Donetsk. His forefathers,
known as free Cossacks, were
notorious and feared 19th
century
horsemen. They fought and died
for this land they referred to
as Greater Russia.
Today, they're training their
children what Cossacks have
stood for, for generations,
love of land and church. It's a
nostalgia for the days before
the Soviet Union collapsed.
Do you feel like what you're
doing now is trying to restore
the power and pride that
was lost in 1991?
VITALIY ANATOLIEVICH (through
translator): Of course I feel
that. It's a renaissance
here. This is pure patriotism.
NICK SCHIFRIN: That patriotism
is a pledge to be an irregular
force for Russia in Ukraine
and beyond. And they cheer
disunity in the European Union
because they oppose what they
perceive as Western culture.
VITALIY ANATOLIEVICH (through
translator): We don't educate
them as they do in Europe
about gay pride and all that. Is
that normal? It's not normal.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The cultural and
military divides within Europe
are widening. Another flash
point? Newly built NATO missile
defense sites in Romania and
Poland. Russia labels them
threats, and vows to retaliate.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President: Yesterday, in those
areas of Romania, people simply
didn't
know what it means to be in the
crosshairs. Then, today, we will
be forced to carry out
certain measures to
ensure our security.
LT. GEN. BEN HODGES: For Russia
to say that this is threatening
to them is a ridiculous
assertion.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Russia would say
those missile defense systems
can be turned from the Middle
East toward Russia.
LT. GEN. BEN HODGES: If -- and
it's extremely unlikely -- but
if Russia ever launched a
nuclear or a missile strike, I
mean, there would be hundreds of
missiles. So this defense
shield that's been installed is
for individual -- I mean, it's a
completely different scenario.
NICK SCHIFRIN: President Putin's
threats are made possible by
nearly a decade of Russian
military expansion. According to
one study, if it wanted to,
Russia could overwhelm NATO
troops in the Baltics in
fewer than three days.
Is it really a deterrence to
have a few battalions in Eastern
Europe, when Russia has hundreds
of thousands of troops
across the border?
LT. GEN. BEN HODGES: You make a
fair point. Certainly, Russia
has been provocative. They
talk about nuclear weapons
against Sweden, Denmark,
Romania.
DIMITRI SIMES: When they feel
that they are threatened, they
have a tendency to close
ranks. Putin now has universal
excuse. Whatever is going wrong
in Russia, he is blaming it
on Obama, he is blaming it on
NATO, he is blaming it on the
European Union.
And most patriotic Russians,
they feel, well, perhaps our
country is being under
tremendous
threat.
NICK SCHIFRIN: That fuels a
cycle of increasingly large
exercises and increasingly
violent warnings.
This level of tension hasn't
been felt in a generation. And
it's being taught by both
sides to the next generation.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Nick
Schifrin in Szczecin, Poland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the
analysis of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and New York Times
columnist David Brooks.
Welcome to you both, although
the show, the program tonight,
Mark and David, consumed
with these killings of two black
men by police in Minnesota and
Louisiana, and then, last
night, this terrible attack
on the police in Dallas.
What do you make of
all this, David?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, it's
been a crappy week.
We have had the killings. We
have had, frankly, both our
presidential candidates behaving
reprehensibly. And so I think
we're sort of at a moment where,
on the one hand, a lot
of harsh truths are being
exposed, a lot of people who
have been silent are speaking
out.
And some of that is about
violence, as we have seen,
against African-Americans.
Frankly,
some of the Trump movement, it's
members of the white working
class speaking out. And
that's all to the good.
The question, to me, is, are we
going to speak out in a way that
is actual dialogue and
conversation,
or are we going to drift into
tribal thinking? There's been a
lot of rancid
overgeneralizations
in our society, that all African
men behind the wheel are
dangerous, that all Muslims
are somehow involved in
terrorism, that all cops are
somehow at war with communities.
And if we can speak in a way
that's not tribalistic, that's
not making these
generalizations, then
we may make something out of the
current moment. But I'm not
always hopeful after a bad week
like this one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, what do
you make out of all this?
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, I think that
we all -- or at least I --
speaking for myself, I was
overconfident,
over-optimistic in 2008.
I thought the original sin of
America, racism, that it was a
time to celebrate, that we had
done something really rather
remarkable in electing an
African -- and we did --
electing
an African-American president,
and that, somehow, with -- this
terrible chapter was behind us.
The constant in every one of
these killings and tragedies
this week is race. And I get
the feeling, almost like 1968,
that events are in the saddle.
It's not Vietnam. There
aren't 548 Americans dying every
week. And we haven't had a James
Earl Ray or a Sirhan
Sirhan yet to assassinate our
leaders, but just a sense,
whether it's Zika, whether it's
Istanbul, whether it's Orlando,
that events are in the saddle
and that things are not
going to get better.
And it's a dreary political
landscape right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, this is a
year where there has been,
David, a lot of anger and
recrimination in the political
conversation. How do the events
of this week play into that?
How do you see that?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, it's
a period of bad feeling.
And when bad feeling happen,
then walls go up and things
close. And we're seeing a lot
of closed-ness, a lot that
things that were open, whether
it was open trade, open free
movement of people, open
conversations, some of that's
closing, or at least the
impulses
within a lot of societies,
including in NATO, by the way,
which we just heard about,
between
Eastern and Western Europe, a
lot of walls going up and a lot
of candidates proposing
walls going up.
And so when people are in a
period of bad mood, then they
want to hunker down and protect.
And that's the exact opposite
from what we need now. And let's
be frank. It doesn't help
that we have an American
political debate with basically
one all-white party.
And that just means we fall
along very polarized lines when
we fall into the normal default
position of politics, that we
fall along racially polarized
lines. And we have to
acknowledge
that's an inherently dangerous
situation, given everything else
that's happening.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about that,
Mark? Are we just not equipped
to deal with these issues
anymore, that we have
become so polarized?
MARK SHIELDS: We have become
incredibly polarized, Judy.
I don't think if it's a
consequence or reflection of the
silos from which we get our
information,
and I don't have to listen to
the other side. I can just get
my own prejudice and perspective
reinforced.
But we are in a time of
incredible political division,
made more so by our polarized
politics.
And we -- there used to be a
great test in politics when I
first started in the business,
and it used to be, can you make
a statement for your candidate
for 90 seconds without
mentioning your opponent?
That's unthinkable in this
election year, when, according
to the very respected Pew
poll, a majority of both
Secretary Clinton's and Mr.
Trump's supporters are basically
voting
against their opponent, rather
than for their own candidate.
And I think that's a reflection
of the condition of our
politics right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, if you
single out, if you look at
Donald Trump for a moment,
David,
he clearly has been saying some
things that have brought, I
think, consternation to some.
And people would say, well,
there's blame to go around.
But Donald Trump was in
Washington this week, we were
told, to try to bring unity to
the
Republican Party, to meet, sit
down with members of Congress
who are Republican to try to
bring
them on board, and it ended up,
apparently, in his meeting with
Republican senators dissolving
into more name-calling.
I mean, what -- how united is
the Republican Party right now
with just one week to go before
their convention?
DAVID BROOKS: Not at all.
He gave a speech earlier in the
week, the Star of David,
mosquito speech, whatever you
want to call it. This speech --
Mike Murphy, the Republican
consultant, said he's always
ranting, but, sometimes, he
veers into full drunk wedding
toast mode.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: And that speech
was incoherent in its logic and
random and what one senses
in him, rising resentment.
In that speech, he ripped on
CNN. He ripped on whoever was in
his way. And then he comes
to Washington and he rips on
whoever is not totally loyal to
him, whether it's Ben Sasse
or Mark Kirk, two senators.
And so he's just filled with a
resentment, even at this moment
of incipient triumph,
at least in the nomination. And
so you see Donald Trump being
ever more Trumpian, and
rather than being more
tame and more civilized.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you see a
little more unity in the
Republican Party or less?
MARK SHIELDS: I think there's a
forced sense of unity right now,
when Bill Flores, Republican
congressman from Texas, says
that very encouraging that Mr.
Trump is making fewer and fewer
unforced
errors, and he thought
that is great progress.
I agree with David about the
performance yesterday before the
Republican Senate Caucus in
particular,
when he took on Jeff Flake, the
senator from Arizona, and said,
you're going to lose this
year. And, of course, Jeff Flake
isn't running this year. John
McCain is. They have six-year
terms in the Senate. I don't
know if Mr. Trump's aware of
that.
But then beating up on Mark
Kirk, who is an embattled
Republican in Illinois, very
difficult
uphill race. And, Judy, I mean,
where was Mitch McConnell, the
Republican Senate leader,
to stand up and say, wait a
minute, you're not going to come
in here, Mr. Trump, I don't
care if you are the presidential
nominee, and attack and belittle
and demean the senators
whose support you're
supposedly seeking?
And I just -- so, there is a
lack of courage, there is a lack
of just common decency, it
seems to me, in the
Republicans right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, meantime,
David, we know that the
Democratic nominee to be, as you
pointed out, has had her
own bad news this week.
As you may have seen, I
interviewed her a short time ago
for the program and asked her
about FBI Director Jim Comey's
conclusion that, no, there
weren't going to be criminal
charges brought, but that she
and the people around her had
been extremely careless in
the way they handled
confidential information.
She said that is not the case,
that that's wrong. But, you
know, whichever way you look
at that, what are we to make of
this investigation, of its
conclusion? Where does it leave
her
as the presumptive nominee?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I agree with
both sides of Comey's
conclusion, that she shouldn't
be charged, but that, basically,
the defense she has given us and
for all these months
was a tissue of lies, that she
didn't have one device, she sent
over 100 classified things,
she had multiple servers, and
that her staff didn't even look
at some of the -- some of
the things they deleted as
personal, some of the e-mails
were actually business.
And so she's told a series of
falsehood. And, frankly, I
thought her reaction tonight was
a little off-tone, a little too
defiant, when a little humility
and a little contrition
might be in order, given what
Comey said, completely
accurately.
And so, if she had real
opposition, this would have been
devastating for her. I don't
think
it rises to the level of sort of
indictable offense, but I do
think it's sobering, and
should be sobering even if you
love Hillary Clinton and you are
a Democratic, to see someone's
claims be exposed as
falsehoods so readily.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Where do
you come down on this?
MARK SHIELDS: I was amazed
at her answer. I really was.
I thought James Comey, the
director the FBI's decision was
that she was -- verdict was not
innocent, is what his verdict
was. And you're absolutely
right. He deemed her people and
herself very careless in
treating -- the way they treated
confidential information.
Judy, the Wall Street
Journal/NBC poll, the last poll,
asked questions of personal
characteristics.
They asked, who do you think is
more honest or trustworthy? And
Donald Trump, not known
as an ethical giant in most
circles, was the choice of 41
percent. Hillary Clinton was
at 25 percent. A meager margin
thought her -- she was more
honest and trustworthy than
Donald Trump.
This is a real problem. It's
been a problem, lack of
transparency and forthrightness,
all
the way back to the Rose firm's
billing records some 20 years
ago in the White House. And
I thought that there was going
to be a start of almost a candor
offensive, the fact that
she was doing the
interview with you.
And I just think it's time for
frankness and an acknowledgment
that this was wrong, that
they were misleading. And to
me, it's not going to go away.
The advantage she has -- and
it's an inescapable advantage --
Pierre Elliott Trudeau, the
Canadian
prime minister, ran for
reelection in 1972, father of
Justin Trudeau, it was a bad
economy,
and he said, the choice is --
don't compare me, please, to the
almighty. Compare me to
the alternative.
And that's her advantage, is
that her alternative is the man
that David just described,
Donald
Trump, who every day makes it
about Donald Trump. I mean, he
is an egomaniac with an
inferiority complex.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But picking up on
that, David, the Republicans are
saying they're going to
drive home this e-mail story
every day between now and the
election. Is that smart on their
part?
DAVID BROOKS: I think so.
I mean, the untrustworthiness is
a core weakness. I have to say,
I think Trump manages to commit
political suicide on a daily
basis, and yet he doesn't seem
to die. I'm -- my big takeaway
from the race so far is he's
only down four points in the
national polls.
And so, to me, looking at the
way he has behaved, this should
be a much bigger victory for --
or
at least a lead for Secretary
Clinton, but it's not showing up
that way because of doubts
about her nearly as great.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's
certainly something that has our
attention, along with some other
sad -- a lot of sad
things this week.
Mark Shields, David
Brooks, thank you both.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week," which airs
tonight on PBS, and she has a
preview
-- Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Hi Judy.
Tonight, we will bring you the
latest on the horrific shootings
in Texas, Minnesota and
Louisiana, and we will sum up a
week that could be the turning
point we have been waiting
for in a fraught political year,
with reporters from The
Washington Post, The Wall Street
Journal, CNN and NPR.
As always, so much to talk
about, Judy, tonight on
"Washington Week."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
we will be watching.
And tomorrow on "PBS NewsHour
Weekend," our coverage from
Dallas continues with additional
reporting from Hari Sreenivasan
and our entire team on the
ground.
And join us again right here on
Monday for the start of our
series The End of AIDS. We
planned to begin that today, but
we postponed it in light of
breaking news from Dallas.
On Monday, our first report
comes from San Francisco, a city
with one of the world's
most ambitious plans to
eliminate the deadly disease.
For now, that's the "NewsHour."
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank
you, and good night.